[Music]
hey everybody welcome to another episode
of conversations with tom i am here with
somebody that i have been so desperate
to get on the show for a long time i
cannot tell you just how much
the one and only jordan peterson jordan
welcome to the show
thank you very much it's a pleasure to
be here appreciate the invitation man i
am beside myself with excitement to have
you on and for a few reasons one you've
had massive influence over the way that
i think and
you have been a guiding light i never
intended to get involved in the culture
wars that's not where i thought
my voice was going to be
but your idea of having to
face things courageously and not
basically just try to hide in the
basement
and
i realized that i was doing that that i
was trying to avoid those topics because
i was afraid of them and that didn't
make me feel good about myself and so i
think a lot about identity
and one of the things that i'm always
telling people is
money success fame all that stuff is
irrelevant what matters is how you think
about yourself when you're by yourself
and
i want to know what you think about in
terms of
self-identity
how we construct our sense of self and
then how we leverage that to move
through the world in a way
that makes sense
so
identity to me is something that's
practical
it's it's your identity is a
uh
it's like a dramatic role
that you play out in the world
and
while playing that out it has to furnish
you with a life
and what that means is that it has to be
it means that it has to be negotiated
with other people
when you're a very young child
and you first start to play with who you
are
you live in a fantasy world and
according to some developmental
psychologists at least
particularly this is grounded in the
theories of piaget that very young
children two or three are quite
egocentric
in their play
they play according to their own rules
and so they're not social yet until
they're three or four
which means that they have their own
goals in mind
and then they erect a little fictional
world around those goals
and then they play out the role within
that fictional world and that's pretend
play and when they get to be about three
or four
and they start playing with other kids
they have to bring
their worlds together and negotiate
because both children have to want to
play
and so that means identity has to expand
beyond its egocentric focus
and
increasingly be negotiated in the social
world
i studied developmental psychology for a
long time especially in relate in
relationship to the
regulation of aggression and
most children
learn to regulate the regression between
the ages of two and four
now
for example for for instance there's a
subset of children mostly male who are
very aggressive at the age of two
comparatively speaking they bite kick
fight hit and steal that's the
definition of of aggressive
and
almost all those children are socialized
out of that by the time they're four
although a small proportion aren't and
they tend to be long-term antisocial
children and then criminal adults it's
very very difficult for that to be
rectified
if it isn't rectified by four
what happens with most children is they
learn to
move beyond their ego-centric
presuppositions and include other
children in the play and so they start
to negotiate their roles and identity is
a sophisticated identity is a negotiated
role
and so it's not appropriate for
associated with who
with everyone
with everyone and of course you know
this is the case because if you if you
well first of all if you're a child and
you want friends
then you can't insist that only your
game be played
so i'll give you an example
there's been observational studies of
children in playgrounds
so imagine there's a group of children
together let's say they're six or seven
years old and they're playing helicopter
so they've got their erasers out and
they're buzzing around in the
helicopters okay so they've already
established the ground rules they've got
together and they laid out the drama
they say well
let's play helicopter and maybe there's
four or five suggestions but the group
the group
develops a consensus that helicopters
the fun game and let's make our erasers
into
helicopters i don't have an eraser well
you can use your pencil and it can be a
long helicopter so everybody gets a role
and everybody's happy about it otherwise
play won't continue right everybody has
to be happy or play won't continue
and so then the the the little drama
organizes itself and the kids play
helicopter and there's consequences of
that that play out like a story and then
maybe another kid comes along and he's
got an eraser
and a pencil in his bag and he wants to
play helicopter too and if he's a
socially sophisticated kid he'll hang
around the outside of the little game
and watch and then he'll take out his
eraser and maybe start making buzzing
noises with it and when when he can see
that there's an opening in the play
situation he'll swoop in and maybe he'll
get integrated
it's like when you're at a cocktail
party and you hear a conversation and
you're hovering around the edge you wait
for an opening and then you say
something that's germane to the topic
and if you're sophisticated enough
and the people are friendly enough then
it'll open and you'll be allowed in
now even popular kids often get rebuffed
when they try to enter an already
structured game
unpopular kids don't watch what's going
on and then they come along and try to
impose their game on the entire group
and then they have a tantrum if they
don't get let in
and so that's a good example of how
identity is negotiated at the earliest
stages
that feels to me um something
it feels very different than what i
would think of as identity so i'm going
to try to put this in context of what i
see as the major movements of your work
and what makes you so powerful tell me
where i go astray
so
i look at your two books and and i'm
literally just paraphrasing from what
you said that they're basically the yin
and yang so you have chaos on one hand
and you have order on the other both
will tend towards tyranny and as far as
i can tell this is why i do not
understand why people are pushing back
on you why there's so much bizarre
backlash is the moral of your story is
hey everybody guess what
you need to find this balance between
the two if you only exist in the
creative potential it ends up being all
chaos all the time if you only exist in
the conservatism the things that are
already there and working they will tend
towards tyranny solidify and cease to be
useful and die and so now it's this game
and you do this brilliant explanation of
what happens in a city that shows
exactly this with artists
and if you can walk us through that
and tell me if if the identity of the
artist if that's what you're trying to
get at with identity because i i'm
understanding what you're saying in
terms of okay in that moment
we're negotiating but there's a grander
sense of who we become
that is seems to me to be
a negotiation with the world so
collectively everybody else but also a
negotiation with how i want to feel
about myself when i'm alone and the
things that i think are right the things
that i think are wrong okay well okay
well that's very complicated so i'll
walk it through so as you pointed out
i'm going to
hold up these books so this is the new
book
beyond order
and it does concentrate on pathologies
of structure and the previous book which
is 12 rules for life and antidote to
chaos
and
the the underlying presupposition there
is that in our phenomenological
landscape so that's the world as we
experience it complete with emotions and
motivations and dreams and
so the full range of human experience
including the subjective and the
objective let's say
can broadly be broken into two domains
and one is the domain of things that are
beyond our grasp and reach and that's
the unknown
the unknown emerges when the unknown
emerges you tend to experience anxiety
and then there's the the known and i
define the known very specifically and
very carefully
the known is the place you are
when what you're doing presult produces
the results you want
and i say want because that brings
motivation and emotion into the game so
you're motivated to pursue something
you pursue it and what you want happens
not only do you get what you want but
you get validation for the structure
that governs your perceptions and your
actions now if you
you know imagine that you're um you know
you're lonely
and you approach a young woman in a in a
social situation
um attempting to make some contact with
her
um you you want to alleviate your
loneliness and so you hope you make a
good impression and you tell a joke
let's say in a relatively awkward manner
and you get rebuffed
then
you feel you you
you're no longer where you control
you're no longer where you exercise
control and that brings up all sorts of
specters and immediately it's like well
why were you rebuffed well maybe all
women are uh to be despised that's one
theory maybe there's something deeply
wrong with you maybe you're having an
off day maybe it wasn't a very good joke
and so when you don't get what you want
then a landscape of question emerged
questions emerge and those questions can
resonate through different levels of
your identity from the trivial oh i told
the joke wrong to the profound there's
nothing desirable about me and i'll be
alone for the rest of my life
now you asked about identity and i used
the example of a child's game but i
could go through an identity and so i do
this particularly in maps of meaning and
so for example let's say i'm sitting
typing
okay we could decompose my identity so
at the highest level of resolution i'm
moving my fingers
and so that could be my identity i'm the
thing that moves its fingers
and then
slightly at a slightly broader level
than that i'm typing words
and at a broader level i'm typing
phrases and thinking them up and then
sentences
and then paragraphs
and then chapters and then let's say
full papers or books that's that's a
productive unit so i'm the author of a
book or the author of a paper that's an
identity but then that's nested inside
for me it would be nested inside being a
clinical psychologist being a professor
being a good citizen
and then that's nested in some inside
something that's even broader than that
and i would say that that's nested
inside
a cultural heroism and i don't mean that
specific to me i mean that for everyone
that's the outermost level whether
you're playing out the role of hero or
adversary say
that's that's the highest possible level
of identity that's the level at which
fundamental morality is adjudicated and
there isn't really anything beyond
outside that is it's beyond us it's the
transcendent itself and you're all of
those at any one time
you're all of those levels of identity
but those are all practical right so
those are the roles that you're playing
in the world all of those are a
consequence of who you are but in
interplay like in this situation with
the child
all of that's negotiated with other
people
and so if you have a functional identity
you see if you have a functional
identity
when you act it out in the world
then you get what you want and need
and if an identity doesn't do that well
then you should
you either retool or your identity
or you retool the world
your conception of the world
well
if you're retooling your conception of
the world then you're retooling yourself
no you can actually i mean what a
revolutionary does is try to bring the
world into alignment with literally
yes literally well and we all do that to
some degree because we are practical
engineers you know i mean
not only do we
perceive the world
but we also
interact with it so that it does
manifest itself in accordance with our
desires there's limits obviously to how
far you can go or how far you should go
with that
you know and
um what are the limits well there's
practical limits nature won't do what
you want it to unless you're
very sophisticated in your
in your application of your knowledge
and other people will object
so
now you might say well you should forge
forward regardless of their objection
and
you know there are circumstances under
which that's true
but
generally speaking that's not a very
good idea it certainly doesn't make you
popular as a child and so that brings up
one other issue i would also say and
this i developed this idea quite a bit
in
the new book
you go from egocentrism as a child you
have to go through this period where
you're socialized
as a child and adolescent and that
really means that you allow your
identity to be molded and shaped by the
group
and you know you think about how
important peers friends and peers are to
children and adolescents you know your
mother will say when you're a teenager
well if johnny jumped off the bridge
would you too
and you say well no but the real answer
is well probably if all your friends are
there taunting you you would in fact
jump off the bridge and not only that
generally speaking you should
because
it's your
duty
it's your developmental duty as a child
and a teenager
to
take your
your isolated self and turn it into a
functioning social unit
now
you could say well d peterson wants
everybody to be a functional social unit
a robot you know a cog in the wheel
and i would say well that that isn't
where development stops
it has to go through that period before
you can emerge as a as a genuine
individual which means you have to know
the rules of the game before you can
break them
but
not being able to abide by the rules is
not anything like being a genuine
creative individual those are not the
same thing and there's plenty of attempt
to confuse the two things because it's
much better if you can't follow the
rules
to view yourself as a uh
avant-garde revolutionary than as a
failure
and it's not like i don't know that
that social molding crushes
obviously it crushes and everyone feels
that these are existential problems
everyone deals with the tyranny of
culture
and the fact that
it does want you to be a certain way and
not other ways and those ways might not
be in keeping with your with your the
deepest elements of your nature well
tough luck for you you have because
you're also the beneficiary of culture
and so you have to offer it your pound
of flesh now you shouldn't do that at
the expense of your soul but you
shouldn't stay an immature child other
either
and so this notion of identity that
we're being fed is very very
it's very thin what are we being fed be
very specific
well there is the idea for example that
your identity is whatever you say it is
and that everyone else has to go along
with that
no
that isn't how it works partly because
no one even knows how to go along with
it
like let's say just for example that
you're a gender non-binary
okay
what am i supposed to do
about that
man i don't know i hardly know what to
do if the rules are already there so
let's say
i grow up i want to being a heterosexual
male
i want to find a woman fall in love with
her
raise a family
have children have grandchildren
that's a game i know the rules to it not
well because everyone's a failure at
that you know it's very difficult but at
least you kind of know what the the goal
is and so does the person you're with
well you leap out of that which is
already terribly difficult you leap out
of that into completely unknown
territory saying um
uh
that i'm presenting yourself as
something other than those categories
leaves everyone around you and you
completely bereft of direction
let me put it in the words that i get
from um your material so what i heard
you just say tell me if i'm wrong is
part of the negotiation that we do from
the time we are little kids and figuring
out that play we're up on the bridge we
jump maybe because we want to you know
fit in with our peer group
um
it there is a sense of order to that now
you've been very careful and it would
drive me crazy if people respond to this
interview as if you have not already
illustrated that it is the balance
between two opposing forces but so we
need enough order so that somebody can
find their way through the world and
that many i think a big part of the
reason that your work has resonated so
profoundly with people is there excuse
me they are left in a world where they
don't know how to
move forward in a way that serves them
spiritually
practically as well for sure and so hey
everybody both of those both of those
practically shades into spiritually as
you move up into the broader reaches of
identity
you know and look this this see one of
the things i really laid this out in
maps of meaning
it took me a long time to understand
that belief regulated emotion
so what happens is that if you act out
your identity if you act out your
beliefs in the world and
what you want doesn't happen
what happens is that your body defaults
into emergency preparation for action
and the reason for that is you've
wandered too far away from the campfire
and now you're in the forest and maybe
you're naked
and so what do you do then and the
answer is well you don't know what to do
so what do you do when you don't want
know what to do and the answer is you
prepare to do everything
and the problem with that is that it's
unbelievably draining
psychophysiologically
like it hurts you
and there's there's an immense
physiological literature detailing
the the cost of of of exactly that kind
of response
and so people need people and animals
they people stay where
what they do has the results they want
that's partly why you want to be around
people who share your cultural
presuppositions
is because you know that for example
even in small ways
let's say you're a country music
aficionado
and you're hanging around with your
cowboy hatted buddies and you throw on a
tape and everyone says great tunes man
and you you know you're happy about that
but you know
you throw on a piece by tchaikowski and
you're
you're in a different subculture and who
the hell are you
and people the people in your group will
say
man who listens to music like that and
like that's a trivial example in some
sense but i believe it's one that
everyone can resonate to
we like we it's very hard on us not to
be where we know what
we know that what we want is going to
happen we hate that
we hate that and no wonder
so and then you know there are there are
varying degrees of that obviously you
can really be where you don't know
what's going to happen or you can only
be there to some degree
but
by and large
by and large we're conservative
creatures even if we're liberal and
temperament there's not we can't
tolerate that much uncertainty
and
you might ask well why and the answer is
well because you can be hurt
pain you can be damaged you can become
intolerably anxious and you can die
so it's no wonder you're sensitive or
very sensitive to negative emotion
and so our identities rate functional
identity regulates your emotion
but you do that in concert with other
people in the first chapter of the new
book beyond order
the rule is
don't casually denigrate social
institutions or creative achievement
that's that balance again
i make the case that
most of your sanity
is socially distributed
and what i mean by that is well let's
say that you know how to behave you're
well socialized you can play with others
now i said already in this conversation
if you didn't learn to play with others
between the time you were two and four
you will never learn
and psychologists have beat their heads
against the wall trying to rehabilitate
antisocial children they can't do it
after the age of four
is that because areas of the brain just
don't develop
well it seems to be partly because the
kids fall farther and farther behind so
let's say you make the leap from
egocentric dependence on your mother at
two and three to immersion in a peer
group well then then you you pick peers
that are at your same development level
and you chase each other up the
developmental ladder
and the longer you're out of that the
farther you fall behind
and so
you know kids five-year-old kids might
come across another five-year-old kid
who tends to cry too much
if they don't get their way
and they'll say we don't want to play
with the baby
and what they're saying is we have to
find someone who's at our developmental
level
shares our developmental horizons so
that we can mutually scaffold our
further development now they're not
going to say that obviously but that's
the situation and kids
test each other out when they first meet
so do adults
game game game game can you play are you
playing at the same level as me i'm
playing my game at the level that will
further my development
can you play along with me if not well
maybe you're lower in status and i can
pull you up as a mentor maybe you're
higher in status and i can learn from
you but if you're a peer we can play
together anyways if you're acceptable to
your peers
and you behave well they'll accept you
and then they tell you all the time if
you're acting appropriately you know if
your jokes are funny if you're
dominating the conversation if you're
bringing something of value to the table
and all you have to do is pay attention
to the social cues
and you'll keep yourself regulated
okay i want to dive in here and i'm
going to see if i'm tracking all of this
because i'm i'm putting this in a larger
context of this really matters and it
applies directly to something that's
happening in the world it seems to me
that you don't dive into things unless
they have real relevance so is it fair
to define identity as
the
self-narrative that emerges from a
nearly infinite number of interactions
with other people and nature itself
well i i i would say yes but that gets
to the point it's so broad it's almost
it it starts to lack
definition so i can take it finer than
that i i'm trying to sort of find the
borders and then then then i will work
in okay so if we're if we still remain
true at that point um then having in the
book you walk through a lot of some of
the people that you've done
psychoanalysis with and so we get a lot
of insights into the actual people that
you're dealing with and how people can
begin to tell themselves a narrative
that is very dysfunctional and you help
them out i don't want to say easily
because that that sounds like it
cheapens it but pretty straightforward
in helping them reframe and framing is
something i'm obsessed with
and so our identity is based on this
it's a self-narrative that we tell
ourselves based on the interactions we
have with other people and nature
such that we begin to solidify a set of
behaviors that make sense for us based
on the goals that we want to achieve and
where we're trying to go am i still good
yes well
you improved your definition by adding
the behavior element because i would say
the fundamental element of identity is
what you act out on top of that there's
the story that you tell do i have to be
consciously aware of it
well
you're consciously aware of some of it
not of other elements of it
you can't be consciously aware of
everything you do and does the conscious
unconscious alike make up my identity as
you define it
your identity is the story you tell
about your actions in the world but it's
also your actions in the world
now why
why does
my identity and i assume as i understand
it why does my identity as i understand
it matter to the course of my life
because it's the it's the structure of
the it's it's the structure from which
the plans that you implement in the
world originates
and you're always acting in the world
you have problems to solve all the time
and you have to solve you have you have
to solve
there's all sorts of problems you have
to solve to stay alive and you have to
solve them for today but you have to
solve them in a way that works for today
that doesn't screw up tomorrow too bad
and leaves next week intact and next
month the next year and so there's a
continuum of you
so that's another see that's the other
reason why
your identity can't just be you
because
or how you feel right now because you're
not only who you are right now and how
you feel right now you're this strange
entity that exists right now but that
already existed in the past and that is
going to repeat itself into the future
and so
you're actually a community of
individuals stretched out across time
and the plans that you implement have to
be beneficial for that entire community
of individuals and it's going to be the
case that there isn't much difference
between you
acting properly with regards to your
extended temporal self and you acting
properly in relationship to other people
that's interesting so you're stuck with
society just because you know that
there's a future you're stuck with
society even if you're solipsistic
right if you think you're the only
conscious
consciousness that there is
there's still the fact that you
have duration across time and that you
know you have to take into account what
the consequence for your actions is
going to be on the 50 year old tom and
the 80 year old tom
and so
now here's a question
do you think that there's something that
has pathologized the creation of useful
identities in today's culture
well
i think each person can judge that for
themselves to some degree i mean the
more functional your identity the better
regulated your emotion
the more positive emotion the less
negative emotion certainly negative
emotion doesn't rise to an intolerable
level if you're fortunate your identity
is well constructed
i think that
any insistence that identity is
something other than
a pragmatic set of actions let's say
that orient you properly in the world
is
sufficiently sparse
so that it isn't going to solve the
problem that has the problems that have
to be solved so i might insist
i'm whoever i think i am at the moment
and if you were polite you would go
along with that and to some degree i
would be right we do that when we allow
people to save face
but if i'm right we go along with their
presuppositions presumptions
we don't call them on their mischief and
a certain amount of that's polite
but that doesn't alleviate the necessity
for me of adopting a role that other
people find valuable otherwise what the
hell do i have to trade
and you might say well why should i have
to trade well
you if you can live all by yourself
then you don't have to trade but if you
can't you have to bring something of
value to the table
and you can't insist on its value other
people have to
agree to that
and so i can't say well i'm my sexual
identity
it's like yeah that's a part of
your identity
so this is where i wanted to go so you
brought up um the idea or the example of
somebody giving a sexual identity of
some kind and
that was what prompted me to say do you
think there are things that are
pathologizing is it just that people are
trying to define
themselves in isolation like adopting
their identity adopting their identity
around um a
non-negotiated with the external people
and world and non-negotiated identity
and therefore when they try to use that
as the lever by which they add value in
this exchange that is life that they're
left going what the [__] like people
aren't respecting it they're not giving
me what i think is my due is that where
this
begins to be a problem
well i think that's certainly part of it
because it's a
it's a sparse theory of identity it's
not it's not going to suffice
because other people have to go along
with it and they have to be able to go
along with it
you merely insisting that you're
a certain way doesn't give anyone else
any guidelines to go along with except
for your whim and that's going to change
and people aren't going to be able to
predict it anyways so the thing is is
that in the identity politics world
there's an implicit theory of identity
otherwise we wouldn't have an identity
politics and obviously the identity it
appears to be the case that the identity
that characterizes identity politics is
something like
unalterable characteristics
they seem somewhat arbitrarily chosen to
me which is also a huge catastrophe
because it isn't obvious why those
elements of identity should be paramount
sex gender race ethnicity
there's endless numbers of other
possibilities and i i can't for the life
of me see why they aren't equally um
what valued let's say
but even even if we accepted the
validity of those as identity categories
the theory under that is that that
constitutes a sufficient
what would you describe it that
constitutes a sufficient identity
because you see we're not having a
discussion publicly about what identity
is
that's assumed a priori it's race it's
ethnicity it's sex it's gender
well
no it's not
and that's actually a big problem
especially not because those things are
not universal not all
um transsexual people think the same act
the same so it's it's unnegotiated and
ultimately um misleading is that the the
weakness of something like that
that's that's some of the weaknesses
it's also it it doesn't provide a useful
a very useful guide to action across
time
because no one knows it's a game no one
knows the rules to okay so i think i'm
starting to get a sense of helpful you
know and then but wait there's one more
thing too because there's also this
analysis of culture that goes along with
this that's part of let's say critical
race theory you take these categories
identity categories
and you accept the implicit theory of
identity upon which they're based and
then you note that the world doesn't
divide up its resources equally among
all those categories and then you make
the assumption that the social world is
prejudiced and corrupt because of that
well
that doesn't follow
partly because
the association between those identities
and reward isn't obvious like you can't
make a living being black
you can't make a living being white
so now give us an example of what can
you make a living like are there four or
five like i was going to say
um is this trying to push people to you
should have the identity of the hero or
something along those lines it gives
them something to strive towards a a
historically charged um
cadre of things that they know okay well
if i'm the hero i'm gonna need to be
brave i'm gonna have to face down the
dragon of chaos you know there's now
there is order and structure to the way
in which i need to move through the
world
well
remember at the beginning of the
conversation i sort of provided a nested
theory of identity so for example
let's say you're a filmmaker and i'm a
professor
okay we could so we differ there
right we're playing a different game
so you might say
and and as you go down into the
particulars of what we do it might even
become more different so if you look at
what a plumber does and a lawyer does as
as you get more and more fine-grained
they get more diverse but you might say
well the lawyer and the plumber are both
honest
they're both good citizens
and then you might nest that inside
while they're both acting out the
archetype of the hero
and
and like i said after that
you're out of the
things get too abstract for us to we
can't go farther than that i think that
you know i think the world is
order versus chaos let's say the balance
of order and chaos on a it's good and
evil on the background of order versus
chaos
and so you're either the hero or the
adversary or actually most of the time
you're a mixture of both
and it's best for you that's what our
culture has decided it's best for you
to take on the role of the hero to the
degree that that's possible and that
would be associated with love and that's
that
the
love
and i define that in the second book
particularly
what's the third book i wrote but in in
beyond order
are you working for the betterment of
being or are you working for harm
and everyone has a sense of this
and they know when they're working for
harm
in self-authoring do you walk people
through uh like a handful of identity
statements to help people craft a useful
identity because i'm trying to so if i
were to say to myself oh i'm a filmmaker
nested in a ceo nested in whatever
none of those immediately tell me what
they are what they do so when i'm
working with up-and-coming entrepreneurs
and i'm trying to help them
because i come at it from an identity
standpoint as well but i come at it from
a really
basic place and this is what i tell
people so your identity is going to
drive your behaviors ultimately your
behaviors are the only thing that
matters so you're going to begin by
telling yourself identity statements
you're going to say i'm the type of
person that so for instance i'm the type
of person that gets out of bed in 10
minutes or less now i started telling
myself that even when it wasn't true
because i needed to start getting out of
bed in 10 minutes or less then that's an
aspiration
and then i put more i'm the type of
person monday through friday if i'm
awake i'm either working or working out
right these become my identity um
i am a husband first right so
even before being an entrepreneur i'm a
husband like and i repeat these things
over and over and over some are
aspirational and become true over time
and some are a recognition of something
that i'm already doing that i want to
reinforce so all i'm trying to do
is use basically cognitive dissonance
against people so that they're not
saying something to themselves and other
people because i always encourage them
to say it to other people as well so
they're not saying something that
they're not actually doing so now you're
trapping yourself into getting out of
bed in 10 minutes or less working your
ass off monday through friday
prioritizing in my case my wife things
like that but it's all like this really
rudimentary
thing about
behaviors just say statements that
you're going to adhere to that make you
act in the way that you should be acting
that's what a behaviorist does
in as a therapist is that
is to break things down to the level of
implementable behavior and yeah you
group behaviors
like an ethical statement is actually a
grouping of behaviors
right an ethical statement is a
statement about a group of behaviors or
it's empty
so
i want to be a conscientious person okay
we have to decompose that into
implementable actions well you did there
to some degree i need to get out of bed
at eight o'clock i need to get out of
bed at in 10 minutes or less i need to
have breakfast within the first half and
a half hour that i've woken up i need to
be able to cook my breakfast i need to
be able to go get groceries because
otherwise i won't have any breakfast to
cook
and so you decompose it you
it is decomposed to the level of
implemented behavior and that means
bodily
that's the point where the abstraction
meets the world right through the
actions of the body
and behaviors concentrate on exactly
that level
rather than you know the psychoanalytic
types might be more inclined to alter
global statements
that would be to say part of the
self-narrative those are abstractions
because they're collections of behaviors
they're that that have an abstract
description associated with them
and yes part one of the things that you
do do in therapy is you notice where
there's disjunctions between the way
people describe themselves and the way
they act of course you do that in
relationships all the time
as well you say to people well you said
this is especially true in intimate
familiar relationships you said x but
you do why
it's like there's a there's a
discordance there and that makes you
unpredictable to me
i don't like that it's probably not that
good for you either
many many arguments are like that
so getting back to now how people can
leverage this information in a usable
way in their life and i'll put it in the
context of
what i see going on in the culture ward
the thing that drew me in is i'm not
worried about myself i'm worried about
other people and my big thing is so i've
worked in the inner cities a lot and so
i've seen people that have a an identity
what i often refer to as a frame of
reference that
leads them so far astray because their
parents will tell them things like
people don't want somebody who looks
like you to be successful and so they
don't even try to be successful and so
that belief about who they are and how
the world conceives of them stops them
from doing the behaviors that would lead
them to be successful
and so
when i look at your core concept which i
love i think is so brilliant that we've
been talking to kids about rights and we
really should be talking to them about
responsibility and what you owe the
world instead of what the world owes you
now i'll frame it a little we have to
balance those right because i mean even
technically speaking
your rights are my responsibilities and
vice versa and so we can't only have
half the dialogue because
the responsibility makes enables the
rights
so
and you know it could easily be that we
could be in a situation where we should
be talking more about rights
but i don't believe that we are in that
situation at the moment
and i i mean i think for me that's been
borne out
by the fact that people have been
interested in what i've been saying
because one of the things i've noticed
time and time again is that whenever i
talk about the relationship between
responsibility and meaning
the crowds that i'm talking to go silent
say look you need a meaning to sustain
you through the vicissitudes of life
okay well try to debate that
it's like is life painful yes is it
anxiety provoking yes is it uncertain
yes
is it painful beyond bearing sometimes
yes it's difficult
everyone agrees about that now they
might disagree about how difficult but
that doesn't matter that the central
point holds
okay
what if you think that's all pointless
well that doesn't seem very helpful
okay so you need a sustaining meaning
well where do you find that
well
you generally find it in responsibility
to yourself and other people
and people ask themselves those
questions when when i'm talking because
i ask them to ask themselves those
questions and
that's the answer well what's meaningful
well i have a meaningful relationship
with my father i have a meaningful
relationship with my wife
i have a meaningful relationship with my
pet you know because i take care of that
pet
um when i commit to something
and make sacrifices
that sacrifice is something i also talk
about a lot in both of the last two
books
you know if something's valuable you'll
make sacrifices to attain it
that that discovery of sacrifice i think
that's what separates human it's one of
the primary factors separating human
beings from animals
because we discovered that we could let
go of something we value in the present
and we would gain something we value
even more in the future we acted that
out dramatically in all sorts of strange
ways over thousands and thousands of
years before it was formalizable
psychologically but it's a massive
discovery i can forego gratification
in a particular way
and benefit in the future so i can share
the proceeds of my hunt
and i store up future food in the form
of reputation
and the favors i've owed i'm owed now by
other people
it's a massive discovery
so
no question on that so when i start to
put this back in the context of
you know what's going on today
so i i see you in a certain way i see
you as somebody who um has had a
long-standing desire to help people make
sense of the world and how to move
through it
both as a public intellectual and as
obviously a psychologist who's working
with people and so when i hear you
talking about um whether it's identity
whether it's the culture war whether
it's you know the balance the needed
balance between chaos and order um it's
in trying to get people to understand
something so they can use it in their
life and and move forward so
taking that the
the reason that i think identity becomes
so important for people now is
they the
generations coming up seem to be using
as a part of their identity a desire for
their rights to focus on that what i'm
owed um
and if they were to flip it over to the
responsibilities that they have now
they're getting into an identity
statement that changes their behavior
set so profoundly that it gives them the
meaning and purpose that you were
talking about earlier
it might be also an experiment you can
run yourself one of the tenets of
cognitive behavioral therapy is
collaborative empiricism
so okay so so when you have a client and
and you say well
you know maybe your mood would be better
if you got up at eight o'clock in the
morning regularly instead of two or four
in the afternoon irregularly
and then you say well we don't really
know if that's true let's try
doing it getting up at two regularly for
a week and see what happens and then
maybe we'll try moving it back an hour
week by week but you can see how it goes
well so this is so i would say run the
experiment it's like is your life better
and you can even look at the way that
you evaluate your past
when you upheld your responsibilities
did that improve your quality of life
even though it might have been difficult
and you know generally people say yes to
that
we derive a certain amount of
satisfaction from past accomplishments
and generally in proportion to their
difficulty
and so
if that's not true
fair enough and i mean there's variation
highly open people tend to take more
delight in
extraordinarily creative ventures and
extroverted people in being with other
people conscientious people are more
duty focused it doesn't really matter
it's still
it's still responsibility
so
it's just
i i see the the the
so there's this this presupposition
let's say with this this set of
identities that we've been
taught to regard as categorical that
good should be distributed equally
according to those categories and that
to me because those categories aren't
functional you can't trade on them
they don't bear any relationship to
outcomes
now you say well no that's just evidence
of prejudice it's like well
no doubt there's some prejudice
i mean no one in the right mind would
would
deny that
but but that's
there's that doesn't mean there's no
competence the fact that there is some
prejudice doesn't mean there is no
competence
in the hierarchy itself
so i once got asked um speaking at
google and an african-american gentleman
asked hey tom do you think that it's
harder for me to be successful because
i'm black and i said almost certainly
true like even just from the perspective
of a school of fish right you
from an evolutionary standpoint we group
up with people that look like we look so
if you're a minority in any country then
it seems self-evident to me that it's
going to be more difficult but my
question is and now what
so you've got options you can
sit in the unfairness of that and i
don't even think people would argue it
it is unfair or
it's even counterproductive
right because hypothetically we want to
exploit all people equally for our own
benefit you know to speak very coldly
about it obviously there's more to it
than that
so my thing is um you talk very
profoundly about resentment in
beyond order and that resonated with me
really well it's like look you're going
to have every reason to be resentful in
your life there are going to be a
million things that come at you but it
doesn't serve you doesn't serve you it
doesn't serve the community like that is
the fastest way for your i wish i had
better words for this i'm sure you do
but for your sort of energy to go dark
for you to step into the role of the
adversary which you define very clearly
is essentially the devil uh you liken
adversaries to mistoffelees to the
columbine shooters and
that is
seeing those as archetypal roles you can
play the hero you can play the adversary
if you're going down the path of
bitterness even if you have every reason
in the world to be bitter the thought of
where that path leads you should be so
terrifying that you should you turn and
say even though i have the right even
though everybody is going to tell me it
makes all the sense in the world for you
to be angry bitter resentful
it's going to take you somewhere that
will be so self-punishing
that there's just no point in heading in
that direction yeah unless you want
unless you want the desolation and waste
that comes with it
yeah i mean in that chapter that's do
not allow yourself to become
arrogant
deceitful or resentful i might have the
order wrong there but that's the chapter
yeah it opens with a discussion of why
you would get resentful it's like well
cultures are raid against you so you're
the target of tyrannical forces that are
beyond your control they're arbitrary
they don't work in your interest at
least not entirely
and the more
eccentric you are let's say the more
tyrannical culture will be to you
and so you're stuck with that and then
nature conspires to destroy you
constantly and is going to do that with
pain and anxiety and aging
and then there's the uncontrollability
and darkness of your own psyche
and everyone faces those now we face the
positive elements of those two the
beneficence of culture the beauty of
nature the glory of the human spirit
that's there as well you have reasons to
be deceitful resentful and arrogant
but
it's not a good game unless you want to
produce hell
i want to talk about that so you were
the one that got me to read the gulag
archipelago
um you're the one that got me to
and and this has profoundly changed my
life for the better you got me to
distrust myself which was such a
brilliant move so you said hey when you
think of nazi germany don't think of
yourself as the one hiding anne frank in
the addict
think of yourself as a nazi guard
because odds are that as much as you
want to think of yourself as the one
hiding and frank the numbers just don't
bear it out and i thought whoa like even
if it is just a thought exercise to
recognize my potential for bringing hell
on earth through silence through
cowardice like not necessarily that i'm
rushing out to do it but that i am
capable of weakness i am capable of
silence at a critical juncture i'm
capable of resentment bitterness um
well silence at a critical juncture i
mean for sure that i mean you you told
the story at the beginning of our talk i
believe about oh no you didn't you told
me this story though about
um or maybe you did mention it about not
having me on your show because someone
called me a misogynist well that's a
good example it was like and it was just
kind of a throwaway in some sense i mean
it's not like i hold it against you it's
all it's obvious why that would happen
but that's actually what's terrifying
about it
these things are easy
you know when i worked very briefly
visited very briefly a number of times a
maximum security prison in edmonton
alberta with a very eccentric
psychologist and
i met a man there who had shot two
policemen in cold blood and
um
who seemed by all appearances when i met
him to be of an ordinary harmless guy
you know um certainly wasn't very
physically pre-possessing and another
one of the criminals that i met
had held down a third a couple of weeks
later and beat his leg to a pulp with a
lead pipe because he was a snitch
and i imagined doing that
it was very shocking
i laid that out in the beginning of maps
of meaning because i was having
aggressive impulses at that time too and
so i was curious about these aggressive
impulses and i imagined doing it and i i
mean i actually imagined doing it
and then i thought i could do that
and then i thought
it's even possible under some conditions
that i might be able to enjoy that
and that was a terrible still a terrible
shock
was a terrible shock then
it's no wonder people don't do this sort
of thing i mean this sort of imagination
but
you know i took the idea that we were
supposed to learn something from the
horrors of the second world war
seriously
never forget
okay
you can't
remember what you don't understand
so what are we supposed to remember
what are we remembering the fact that
all these people were murdered
no
we're supposed to remember that that was
a revelation of the genocidal nature of
the human psyche
that's partly why i'm so
impressed let's say with the story of
cain and abel i
dealt with that in my biblical lecture
series and in my writings
you know the first two human beings
according to the book upon which our
culture is predicated for better or
worse the first two human beings
brothers the adversary and the hero
the the archetypal adversary in the hero
put right at the beginning of that
amazing book
it's the beginning of history cain's
sacrifices are rejected by god okay well
how do we understand that that's easy
once you know the key
you make sacrifices to make the future
better
well what if that doesn't pay off well
you know think about that you know what
that's like
you endeavor to do something
and it doesn't work
you're not appreciated for who you are
you fail
maybe you failed despite your best
efforts
well
are you rejected by god well it's as if
you're rejected by god
does it make you resentful
does it make you bitter does it make you
want to pull down
the successful
does it want it does it make you want to
pull down the successful out of spite
does it make you want to pull down the
successful out of cosmic spite
the answer to that happens to be yes
you shake your fist at god
you say i'm gonna harm
those whom you blessed
and no wonder
it's no wonder
you know it's a it's harsh that
the rewards of life are indiscriminately
distributed
it's hard on everyone
but it doesn't help it doesn't help to
become bitter and it's not like i don't
understand the temptation
i mean i think part of the reason i get
away with being so bloody preachy is
because i'm talking to myself you know
it's not like i don't put myself
in the boat of the damned and lost
very well dangerous
now i listen to the whole times
and i see this in this culture war
i see this resentment
it colors the definition of identity
this attack on meritocracy
it's an attack on merit
itself
you know that says nothing about whether
or not culture is tyrannical yes
but it's not only tyrannical
and it's important to get those
distinctions correct
so i want to then put a coda on that
because i think you cover it
so well in your book and in the in rule
number one don't denigrate social
institutions or creative accomplishment
reading that title i didn't realize what
you meant until i read the chapter
and
what that is ultimately and correct me
if i mistake anything but cultural
institutions are the order they're the
stability
and the they're granted there are these
these these identities that are handed
to you ready made
and thank god for that marriage is one
it's like well you can critique marriage
fine but
what game are you going to play
try coming up with some try coming up
with one on your own maybe you can maybe
you're like avant-garde picasso
maybe you are and maybe you have a right
to to make your own arrangement
maybe you have the
psychological fortitude to craft your
own social institution but i bloody well
wouldn't count on it
you're lucky
that there's such a thing as a job
or better yet a career you're lucky that
there's such a thing as friendship
as marriage
all of these social institutions
you know and and
and when you criticize them nietzsche
put as one question of conscience and i
think it's in twilight of the idols
whether you're a leader or whether
you're running away you're outside the
pack and moving in a different direction
in either case you know are you
a rebel rebel because you can't fit in
or are you a rebel because you could fit
in
but you see a better way it's like
people in that category are not that
common and the first question of
conscience should be well which of those
two are you
it's highly probable that you're the
first one and not the second
because that would mean you'd be
intensely disciplined
plus creative
on that dimension
maybe that is you and god then we need
you you know like you're the an avatar
of the savior under those circumstances
and maybe everyone has some of that in
them
that that's a a big question and i think
is one of the fundamental questions that
you address which is the almost the need
to have them both
and
so
you give an example in the book in
beyond order where
you said let's take a city and imagine a
really run-down dangerous crime-ridden
area the people that find themselves
attracted to that inevitably become the
artists and they move in and they think
hey with a little bit of effort this
could be kind of cool and then they move
in they start to make it cool then the
first coffee shop pops up and then the
gentrifiers start moving in and then the
chain stores start moving in and then
that place is no longer suited to the
artist and the artist must move and i
thought oh my god like in in one
description of a city and this like when
when people listen to you
this is the very thing i want them to
understand which is there is a nature to
things and instead of you know shaking
your fist to god you know why why is
this like this is to recognize how
predictable this [__] is
and to find a meaningful way right to
find your meaning to shoulder your
burden put your shoulders back like you
know climb your way up the the
competence hierarchy by getting so good
that you can't be ignored
but recognizing hey dear artist
what a beautiful contribution you make
it is necessary in a certain place at a
certain time but that will evolve and so
instead of being angry that the natural
course of things is that you've made
something beautiful which attracts
people such as the nature of beauty
recognize that you know there's like a
johnny appleseed quality to that and to
relish in that identity of i am the
artist i make things beautiful i attract
people to my beauty you know hopefully
in some transcendent way i mean you
talking beyond order about
the need for beauty in your life and how
chapter seven yeah the very things that
we consider um
impossible to put a price tag on is
always art and so there is that thing
but
like tying it all together from identity
to meaning and purpose to the the almost
cruel nature
of things that description arrested me
in the book because i could both feel
the joy of the artist when they discover
something and create something and also
feel their heartbreak as the
place changed so much you even say in
the book where they can no longer afford
the rent and so there there is a cruelty
to you are the one that gave birth to
this thing and made it what it is and
then it gets to the point where you
can't afford it and you have to move on
and now to really tie [__] together and
bring it back around to you getting me
to read the gulag archipelago
you realize
even i have the impulse to be like oh
that's not fair like how do we make sure
that the artist can stay there and you
know they've done so much to contribute
and then you realize the hammer is
essentially the only way
and
that's where it all starts to get scary
for me and where i don't feel like
people are extrapolating and looking
into the future of
uh i don't know if you know thomas soul
but he has a great quote
which is the last 30 years have been
marked by take replacing what works with
what sounds good
and to me that feels like the
fundamental flaw of today which ties
into your notion of rights versus
uh responsibility
well the chapter on artists so artists
are high in trade openness and open
people
live in
they live farther in chaos they're good
at pattern recognition they tend to have
high verbal iqs the pattern recognition
manifests itself to some degree in their
artistic proclivity because like visual
art is a patterning of the world an
investigative patterning of the world
and so they're the intuitives
they see they see what's coming they
live on the edge they live on the
frontier well there are frontiers
everywhere there's frontiers in every
discipline there's frontiers in cities
and you talked about that it's like this
the artist is someone who can see
possibility and so they'll take a
rundown place and beautify it that's
that's their niche
and
it's it's an evolutionary niche
technically speaking we have five
dimensions of personality there's
variation in each of those dimensions
because there's a niche for every
every what would you call every place on
the distribution
and you have to find your place
in the world according to your
temperament
i mean you can change your temperament
to some degree although it's not it's
not it's no simple matter it's pretty
stable it's better to
find the place that you belong
you know and open people might be very
annoyed that they're not appreciated by
more conservative types but
the conservative types fill a different
niche
they're conscientious and dutiful and so
if something's working you want
conservatives to run it
because they're dutiful and efficient
and orderly
by the book
patriotic this works let's uphold it
let's make it work efficiently let's not
change it because we might break it
but it needs breaking well
that's the debate that's the purpose of
free speech that's
that that's my sense of it you know
there's this balance that has to be
obtained between tradition and
transformation
we have to have respect for both of them
and how do we know when something needs
to be changed
we don't know
so we have to argue about it
and in order to argue about it
effectively we have to be able to talk
to each other across
our identity boundaries
and then we can decide well should this
be maintained or should this be
transformed
why because we talk
well i think we do a lot of i'm not so
sure that we can't
i mean
part of it might be that we're talking
to each other way more than we ever did
and we and it's too much
like i don't know
these things are all beyond my capacity
to understand i'm still wrestling with
what's at the core of the culture wars
let's say although i do think that the
pathological element of it is a war on
competence
um
restrictions by resentment
yeah
that's what it looks like
to me
you know and like i said i can
understand the resentment
you know it's it's it's
it's
we have to strive
not to be wretched
there's something that doesn't seem fair
about that why couldn't we just be happy
being who and what we are
why is it that we're punished if we
don't strive
well i don't know
we're negan tropic organisms right i
mean we have to maintain this incredible
complexity in the face of a dissipating
universe it requires effort
it's the it's this it's the second law
of thermodynamics i believe
that's why we have to strive well why is
the world constituted that way couldn't
i guess it's an infantile paradise wish
in some
regard couldn't we just be rewarded for
who we are
i can understand that
but i don't think that it works
i don't think that's how things
i don't think things function like that
and i don't think probably in the final
analysis we really want them to i don't
know if anyone enjoys undeserved reward
you know
it feels kind of creepy
doesn't it to be rewarded for something
you didn't do
it does i'm obsessed with this idea of
the physics of being human that there
are just certain things that are true
that our brain has algorithms running in
them
that are going to push us to be uh
striving to you know push against
entropy
you know partly just to you have to risk
danger to go out and get food and
provide for your family and keep them
safe so it makes sense that you have
that pushing at your back um also seems
to me that you have an innate drive for
progress and that you'll never be happy
if you're not advancing in some way
getting better well i think that's
technically true you know and in maps of
meaning in particular i make a
neuropsychological argument for that
based on mostly based on the work of
geoffrey gray who i think was the
greatest neuropsychologist of the last
half of the 20th century and he drew a
lot of his ideas from norbert weiner who
was a cyber cybernetic theorist who was
instrumental in the development of
artificial intelligence these ideas have
a uh what would you call it a stellar
academic
origin
and positive emotion great laid this out
better than anyone else the positive
emotion that we find sustaining
is experienced in relationship to an
unachieved goal
it's hope that drives us forward we want
something and if we see ourself moving
towards that
then
we're we're in the grip of the positive
emotion that we find sustaining it isn't
the attainment attainment is satiating
attainment shuts down the system that
has been striving for that particular
object of attainment if you're hungry
and you eat you stop being hungry now
that's good because the hunger is gone
but that whole frame
disappears
you can no longer strive within that
frame
and you need a new frame to strive
towards
and so technically and this is well
established as far as i'm concerned we
even know the drugs that people abuse
cocaine let's say amphetamines the ones
that are potent
sources of positive emotion
activate the system that regulates our
emotional response to evidence that
we're moving towards a desired goal
so cocaine for example
is an exhilarating drug it makes you
feel that things are worthwhile because
it hijacks the system that does make
indicate that things are worthwhile
so this is deeply this this striving
aspect is deeply rooted in in our in our
biology
for obvious reasons you you covered that
very well in beyond order and this is
one of the things um that and it this
particular thing finds itself sort of in
in many different um of the rules but
this idea that there is an evolutionary
wind at your back there are reasons that
stories contain certain elements over
and over and over
and
i want to wrap this together in the
following question
i think i can give you an example of
that so there's a part of the brain
called the hypothalamus and it's very
very very old we share it with virtually
every animal that has a nervous system
it's
sits above the spinal cord it's
extremely old evolutionarily speaking
and half of it governs fundamental
motivations so
governs hunger for example so if you're
hungry
you posit the existence of something
that will satiate your appetite a peanut
butter sandwich and then you're happy
when you're moving towards the kitchen
and then maybe you get thirsty and the
hypothalamus does that and then maybe
you need to use the washroom and maybe
you're too hot and
that the hypothalamus pops up these
little motivational frames and then
emotions modulate your movement towards
the goal that's established by these
fundamental motivations but that's only
half the hypothalamus the other half is
the origin of the dopaminergic system
that
mediates exploratory striving and
positive emotion and so the way our
brains are set up way below what
way below the neocortex way way older
than that the default position is if
you're satiated in all the important
dimensions
then you're curious and explore
well why well because you might find new
resources that could be used to
to to uh
satiate those fundamental motivations in
the future so that heroic drive into the
unknown is
unbelievably archaic
and then it's regulated by fear and pain
you know so you go into the unknown well
you don't want to die so if you get
damaged you experience pain and you want
to avoid pain so you experience anxiety
these are very fundamental systems and
they are reflected in our narratives
that's essentially as far as i can tell
why
the dragon
hoards treasure everywhere the dragon is
an amalgam of predatory stimuli
and fire
which is a destructive force but also
very useful so
dragon is something like predatory
destructive entity you might say well is
that real it's like well yeah but it's a
meta category it's like there are lions
and raptors and
um
lizards
let's say uh 60 million years ago when
we were still in trees
the idea that there's a meta predator is
a great idea
a meta predator is what all predators
share in common
that's a dragon well what should you do
with a dragon
well avoid it that's one answer another
answer is burn it out of its lair so
that it doesn't have baby dragons
the and the
an even more sophisticated answer is
well
confront it
you can feed your family with the body
of a dragon
it's treasure
and then that's become
abstracted up into the unknown as such
you do a great job of uh telling the
story of tiamat martic all of that in a
way where you re-grounded it in the
actual historical context because they
talk about when you slay the dragon you
can actually build things from it they
talk about
pieces right having an earthquake
amazing i thought wow that's kind of
interesting and then you said no no they
actually used to build the you know the
doorways to their cave or whatever from
the bones of the animals that they
slayed and i thought oh my god when you
put the story in that context of you're
telling the tribe something that they're
actually doing but you're elevating it
and so you're saying look the great hero
goes and slays the most dangerous of the
most dangerous predatory thing and from
that we're not just creating our house
we're creating the heaven and the earth
and i thought whoa like you really do so
i'm gonna that's why in christianity
which is
has taken the hero myth in in a
tremendously sophisticated direction
christ tackles the worst of all
potential dragons and that's
the adversary that's the evil in the
human heart
it's become completely psychologized by
that point or spiritualized instead of
an external monster that's the threat
and let's make no mistake external
monsters are are threatening
but then there's their external monsters
that are other tribes
well those are genuinely threatening too
and we can demonize
a member of another tribe at the drop of
a hat
but then you take one level above that
even you think well the most dangerous
thing of all is the evil that lurks in
the human heart
in the individual
and that's why you have the battle let's
say between christ and satan
that's what that means it's not all it
means
but that's what it means and and so what
you and then you ask yourself like you
can ask yourself this question very
seriously
if you were thinking about the most
moral possible action
wouldn't that be
the voluntary constraint of the evil
that you yourself are likely to do
and wouldn't that mean facing human evil
in its reality as it manifests itself
inside you and wouldn't that mean then
obtaining victory over that
and you might say well is that a divine
story well
it's the
i can't say what the relationship is
between the human psyche and
and the world as such
but we don't have a deeper story than
that
and i can't see how it's not true and
you might say well it's not true for me
it's like well don't you have a
conscience
doesn't it bother you
and then can you control it
and answer that is almost inevitably no
it calls you
to account
and why well because you've deviated
from the ideal who's ideal
an ideal that's making itself known
within you at least in so far as the
objection arises you wake up at three in
the morning and torture yourself for
your
inequities
and you would think well i could just
shut that off it's me after all
but you can't shut it off you're nothing
compared to your
conscience now it's strange because you
can ignore it you cannot live according
to its dictates but it's not going to
leave you alone
jordan you asked the times person uh in
the full-length article or a full-length
recording which i listened to you said
hey don't focus on my illness in this
focus on
why
people resonate with my message which
she of course did not
uh but that leads no one does oh it
leaves me an opening i'm gonna take it
right now it's so interesting to see
that is that
it's so interesting because
you know the only time that ever gets
addressed
is but by the mainstream media jesus you
know horrible cliche but
it's usually sort of brushed off and
it's usually well he seems to be
attractive towards young men who are
troubled
well first of all that's not so bad is
it i mean hypothetically
the most ardent feminist is primarily
concerned with helping
the troubled young man not be so
troubled
but it's brushed off in a cynical sort
of way and it the cynicism is also
disbelief that that could possibly be
serious
a serious enterprise well i think it's a
serious enterprise
why do you think
i think it's because
who knows the final answer to anything
you know but i took what i learned about
what happened in the second world war
seriously
it's like wow
we can be really bad
we should do something about that
like that was unacceptable
well was it or not well how unacceptable
was it change your life unacceptable
better be
if you want it not to happen again
and it's not like it the next time it
happens
will make the previous time look like a
picnic
we're way more powerful than we were
you know when we're getting to the point
there's something jung talked about
especially near the end of his life
we're getting so powerful that
each individual is now a force of almost
unimaginable destructive power if they
so choose to be
and that's just going to
that power is going to continue to
increase
and what that means is that the degree
to which each of us has our act together
is going to be something upon which the
world increasingly depends
for its maintenance
i'm going to add something to why i
think people resonate with you so much
in the book you encourage people to
think from an evolutionary perspective
which i think is incredibly important
and i think what you
offer people is one you make we all
struggle with our own internal demons
and you
allow people to see how that's a heroic
endeavor maybe the ultimate heroic
endeavor to conquer that inside of
yourself and then going back to the
beginning of identity being a function
of behavior
by helping people begin to identify as
the hero engaging in relatively
straightforward behaviors like cleaning
your room or liking the new book making
an area beautiful
refusing to give into resentment aim at
one thing which [__] was one of my
favorite parts of the book and see how
extraordinarily good you can get at that
like when i think that's a good thing is
you've got to aim at something
it's like otherwise your life is
meaningless well what should you aim at
well i don't know well pick something
pick something aim at it as you move
toward it you'll get wiser then maybe
your aim will change that's okay but at
least it'll change in an informed way
it's like discipline yourself in one
dimension
see what happens
well that's exciting
and i think that's something that's open
for everyone
you can do that
i shouldn't say that because i don't
believe that i think you can find
yourself in a situation that's so dire
that you don't
there's no escape from it
but
that doesn't matter because
this still this is the hero myth might
not be
the best we have might not always work
but it's still the best we have
and the fact that it might not work
doesn't mean we should throw it away
it's still the best we have
i mean everyone dies and so we fail in
some sense
the fact that a symphony ends doesn't
mean that it wasn't worth listening to
yeah when you put that in an
evolutionary context and you acknowledge
that people are
compelled by biology to strive they're
compelled by biology to progress they're
compelled by biology to
um be courageous that they will be
rewarded for being courageous
neurochemically they will be punished
for being a coward neurochemically
and
yeah well think about you know the thing
about that biological explanation too is
that we've been social for a very long
time we've been social for so long that
our social nature is programmed into our
biology
and so
you'll be punished if you're not useful
to other people yes
by your conscience because you're a
social creature
and the question is well how could you
be most
here's another question that starts to
what verge on the religious
what does the most useful person look
like well who is everyone hoping they'll
meet
and that's a genuine question
like
and that's the ideal the ideal is the
person everyone's hoping they'll meet
that's christ in in the christian
culture
psychologically speaking
independent of any religious claims
so that's
these these this is this is
i suppose the essential idea of the
archetype from the union perspective
we have the we have the image of an
ideal
and because it is the ultimate ideal it
has a religious element it's compelling
it's a judge why is it a judge well if
you fall short of the ideal your
conscience punishes you so it's a judge
and it's merciful well why because if
you act out the ideal
then your life improves
you know what i said well the question
what is the relationship between these
images of the psyche
and
reality
i i don't know the answer to that
i don't know
where
the archetype shades into
reality
it depends to some degree on how you
define reality
and you know this is i've been
people don't like that
statement
but
when you're asking questions that are
deep enough you start to have to ask
what do you mean by true for example
what do you mean by real because the
questions you ask get so deep that
they're of the same kind as the question
what is real or what is true
you know if think of it this way
reality is what we adapt to
by definition that's reasonable if
you're a darwinian you have to say
that's actually as far as you can go
reality is that which shapes us
you can't get a better handle on reality
than that well
when you make a picture of objective
reality it's not the same as that
it's a different picture
and it's not obvious which one should
play trump
now the hero myth as far as i can tell
is an evolutionary artifact
and that means that for human beings
that the hero image is the path of
of optimal adaptation
does that reflect reality
well it does insofar as reality has
selected that
well does that mean that reality is a
story
because the hero myth is a story or at
least that's one of the things it is
does it mean that reality has a
narrative aspect
well it does in so far as we act things
out
does that mean that reality is
ultimately a story
well i don't know
but the answer isn't obviously no
yeah
reading the book
beyond order
there was
a part in there that struck me as this
is going to be the new battleground that
jordan is going to be fighting on do you
have
do you have a sense of um
what in the book is gonna trigger people
no
i mean i didn't think that
the lobster
the last book was going to be so
hillary'd i mean i thought it was
i thought it was really cool it's like
oh my god
serotonin mediates dominance in lobsters
and people how ancient
how remarkable
but
well that took off in all sorts of
directions you know people made fun of
it it's like well you can make fun of
350 million years of evolutionary
history if you want
you can put your social constructionism
up against 350 million years of
evolutionary history good luck to you
i didn't think it was like and you know
the idea that i was trying to insist
that because lobsters live in
hierarchies that
hierarchies are the source of all moral
value
you know that's
i was trying to insist that hierarchies
are in are so inevitable that you see
nervous systems adapting to them across
virtually every level of animal
and why well because
some things are valuable
and since and within any given domain of
value some valuable things are more
valuable than other things
and so you have a hierarchy there's no
avoiding it as long as you need
something as long as there's scarcity
a hierarchy is inevitable
yeah nobody cares how many big pens you
have
it's because they're not scarce
so you can't have status because you
have 200 of them
but as soon as there's scarcity there's
a hierarchy
and there's always scarcity of one form
or another no matter how rich you get
you know if you're if you have 100
million dollars picasso paintings are
still scarce
yeah the uh
the pushback on the the lobster thing
it falls into two things for me one
i don't understand why people look for a
reason not to listen to somebody which
to me most people coming after you for
that one just they didn't want you to be
right or to be heard and so they went
after something that they thought they
could mimify and and shut down on and
then i understand that like i understand
that
i
it's obvious why people are looking for
a reason not to listen to someone it's
like how god damn many people can you
listen to there's nine billion of them
you know so you have to not listen to
almost everyone and so you'll fall for
any excuse and sometimes that's not so
good you know because you have a bias
that prejudices you against a viewpoint
that you actually need that's that's a
problem but the phenomenon itself like
you know you you mentioned sorry to
bring this up again but because it's
germain and and relevant
someone said something disparaging about
me and they were on your staff it's like
well you have lots of
options for guests
you're looking for no
you're always looking for no
because you can only say yes to a very
limited number of things
so
that's another reason we have to be very
careful about our prejudices because
we need them you know to
i don't mean prejudice in obviously in
this
inappropriate social sense but jesus we
have to shield ourselves from an excess
of information
we're very limited capacity processors
no question
i i don't understand though i don't
understand really
and it's really killing me i think i
might might mean that literally
i don't understand why
i'm so controversial
i can't figure that out it's very
distressing to me
you want me to take a stab at it
sure
good metaphor
all right so my gut instinct in terms of
why
a certain type of person uh responds
negatively to you
is
when you think of a person as a
blank slate and that we all have this
collective responsibility to make sure
that everybody ends up the same
then
you saying some people are better at
something than others already is feels
judgmental and so it is
oh yes for sure
and
but when you have a collectivist view
and you believe that everyone should
have equal outcome which by the way i
think everybody yourself included like
if only right like that would be amazing
like if everybody could live truly in
harmony and that didn't violate
principles of just the human animal
which is why i always remind people to
remember you're having a biological
experience but you say things that are
they violate a deeply compassionate
person's desire to take care of
everybody the sort of no child left
behind type thing and
when you
insist on
in your own life like i'm only going to
say that which is true and i'm certainly
not going to let somebody force me to
say something i don't believe is true so
now with that and by the way all of that
and this is a key thing i think you have
to understand you're fighting with a
level of intensity that makes sense when
you realize your obsession with what
happened in the 20th century the gulag
archipelago what happened there uh
obviously nazi germany mouse china like
the number of people that have been
killed in these essentially social
experiments so you have this deep
intense thing trying to get people to
understand like hierarchies are real
there's no escaping them not everybody
is as good as everybody else at
everything
and by the way you have to shoulder
responsibility and
that's where people are like you just
to them i cannot and before i say what
they think i will reiterate you have
changed my life forever and for the
better i will forever be grateful to the
things that you continue to put out into
the world and i missed you horribly as a
thought leader during 2020 of all years
to be on a jordan peterson diet i was
not happy about that
but what they think of is
that you're being mean for the sake of
being mean that you're not trying to
help them see you cannot pretend reality
isn't reality in pretending that the
dragon is not there the dragon does not
go away the dragon grows more powerful
more likely to devour you and your
family and so yeah i'm seeing smaller
but they don't see that
and so that's why i'm like when i see
people attack you i'm like jesus christ
how many times does he have to say this
is about a balance between order and
chaos that you need both of these things
that
you have to show the responsibility
because that is what reality demands
that you're in you're nested in an
evolutionary context there are things
like hierarchies that will play out in
uh in the
the
body inception exactly and so
you may not want to feel bad when you
walk in the room and are worse at
something than everybody else but you're
going to you may not want to feel bad
when you're rejected but you're going to
you may not want to feel bad because
you're just lazing around your house and
not doing anything but you're going to
and
you have peered into enough of human
nature to recognize hey there are just
certain truisms you've now given us 24
of the i forget how many were originally
in the core article 49 or whatever so 42
42 okay we've got 24 answer to the life
of the universe and everything
right is that all
standards number
so oh my god that's perfect actually uh
it it is
this incredible
thing once you break free from ideology
and that's where again this is one of
the rules in beyond order
not to fall prey to ideology this is
where i thought you were going in the
beginning with identity i thought you
were going to say
identity has become pathological because
it has become it's been simplified you
talk about this and beyond order once
you simplify something and this is how
an ideologue gets you they simplify it
they make it very understandable becomes
very clear who's in and who's out you
can reward and punish based on that
people are grabbing these unnegotiated
self-determined pieces of identity that
don't necessarily bring value to the
larger world which will create
dissonance in their own life because
they've got all this substructure
running
you know what i mean it's like i'm not
saying they're like your race i suppose
is a value
but it's not a tradable value and your
gender and your sex the same thing it's
like
i guess it's partly because there's no
scarcity
you know it's like we've got enough
white people
being white doesn't buy you anything
so
and i i'm not saying that with any
pleasure
that's what i think people miss
this is why i think people come after
you
they don't recognize that you're
not saying it
you're not relishing in this you want
people to be happy and i i'm always so
confused
jordan i don't know why you remain as
vulnerable and open as you are after the
time saying i was like what the [__] you
sounded so
kind open compassionate after what four
years of
you know some percentage of the world
relentlessly slandering you
and obviously you get people that cheer
you on probably way more people that
cheer you on than dope but you still
remain
vulnerable which is [__] incredible
but the fact that they don't recognize
that you're trying to
help like i could get it if they said
hey look i disagree with you
or the other but maybe they do recognize
that you know there's a lot of cynicism
about the help and i i can't understand
why you'd be cynical about help unless
you weren't that help
weren't that pleased about the idea of
help
you know like all these deplorables that
i'm helping these angry young men
you know they don't deserve help
well i don't think that
i don't know anyone that doesn't deserve
help
you know there's this idea in the new
testament that you should love your
enemies
it's like
why would you do that
well it'd be better if they weren't
your enemies
and their unnecessary suffering doesn't
help
it's not
helpful it's not like you don't you know
anyone with any sense
anyone who's human
is liable to take
pleasure in vengeance
or even in but you know when people go
after the journalists that have gone
after me i don't take any pleasure in
that
i don't sit back at my home and rub my
hands and think
you know
you got what was coming to you
i do think sometimes you've got what was
coming to you but i think of that more
like
watching someone in the road you know
they're in the road and they have their
back turned and the truck runs over them
it's like well you were in the road and
there was a truck
and
so you got what was coming to you
because you were on the road and there
was a truck but i don't take any
pleasure in it
i don't see that it's helpful
what do you want people to get out of
beyond order it it is extraordinarily
well thought through
it is
very well laid out each
sentence
stacks like a brick upon the next i
wouldn't advise i don't know if you feel
differently but i wouldn't advise people
to read them out of order it's literally
this very careful case being made
that taken in totality is
breathtaking i think you can read them
in either order i think you can read
them in either order
i tried maybe maybe they're better read
in order but but
um i think that if you read the second
one first then it would color your
vision of the first one i mean i mean
the rules
the i think you're right twelve rules
for life and beyond order it doesn't
matter they're yin and yang you mean the
rules themselves the rules themselves
just it stacks so well so otherwise it
wouldn't be a book okay i mean each
the thing about writing a book is that
you're outside of time and space in
relationship with the book because
chapter one comes before chapter 12 but
not when you're writing it you can go
back and modify chapter one because of
chapter 12. i did try to tie them
together so that they make a book you
know and they one builds upon another
that's like that's the musical element
of it as well the recurrent themes
i'm glad you liked it see i can't tell
i can't evaluate it um i'm hoping that
it
it's of the same level of quality that
the first book was
and i'm not making any claims saying
that about the level of quality of the
first book i'm just that was as good as
i could do
and i wrote the second one under
unbelievable duress
yeah and so i can't tell if it's you
know
whether that was a
curse or well certainly a curse
and no doubt about that i don't know how
it impacted the book though
it's hard to say what do i want people
to get out of it well
i'm hoping that they find it useful the
same way they seem to have found the
first one i'm embarrassed
that actually hurts me actually both of
them hurt me i would say
because
i'm ashamed you know of what's happened
to me
what do you mean and
they're books about life and my life is
i'm very hurt i'm a very destroyed
person in many ways and so
i feel
unworthy
unworthy of what
you name it
i hope people find it useful
you know
i hope it alleviates some unnecessary
suffering
that's the goal
here's how i read your books and
everything that you've put out into the
world
the people that should write the
instruction manual are the people that
have struggled and
in your suffering
you have been able to piece together
useful information which is the
barometer by which i judge a book's
value for sure
the reason people flock to your
lectures they buy your book is you have
made in modern times the single most
coherent and useful instruction manual
for life
period so
the i fear that the
brokenness that you feel the heartache
that you feel translates into something
usable that couldn't be written by
somebody that hadn't
gone through what you've gone through
well i would like to believe that was
true you know there's a bit too much
self-justification in it for my taste
but
i thought the other day i'd probably do
this too and no
i would i have to record an announcement
for this book because it's coming out on
tuesday i thought the best announcement
would be just to thank people for
all of their kind attention
i'm very fortunate
in that regard
i get letters from people all the time
that
they open up their hearts you know it's
really something
but i am somewhat
nonplussed let's say
for all this
work
i'm pretty broken
in general or just in this moment
don't know
i think in general
man well i will say this as somebody
whose life you have touched
and the thing i want you to recognize in
me as i imagine
countless other people want you to
recognize in them
more than warm wishes is
i have put to use the things that you're
teaching and they have made my life
better and they have made the lives of
those around me better
and man it is really heartbreaking to
see you
um
go through what you're going through now
and i certainly get it
um
you know and i don't know you well
enough to offer you any sort of um
familial
consolation so i will just say
that what you do matters probably more
than you think it does certainly as much
as you think it does
and i i had never met you through 2020
and i started reaching out to people
that we both know
asking about you because i i believe
that the world
needs
the insights that you uniquely have
coming from your background of mythology
and understanding what is
deeply ingrained in the human psyche
from an evolutionarily
shaped
perspective
and that nobody is putting it together
the way that you're putting it together
and
the fact that you've been
you know i mean hopefully it's it's
small in comparison to the people that
are supporting you but jesus like i
don't i know i would not put up with the
amount of [__] that you've put up with
and the fact that i think the individual
is the only way to approach any systemic
problem like you just have to deal with
the individuals and then from there it
will echo out into society and so the
fact that that's your approach
i kept telling people we need jordan
peterson right now
and
i'm so grateful you're back
i know this book will be
very successful because i'm glad you
liked it i'm glad you liked it because
like i said i it's really hard for me to
evaluate it you know sometimes i
well i have every possible thought that
you could have about it you know
sometimes i read it and i think oh that
seemed to have turned out pretty good
and other times i think jesus i've said
this 50 times already and
yeah i'm all over the place i can't
i think that happens it happens when you
write a book you get so
because you know if when you read
someone else's book
you can kind of tell if the ideas are
original at least in so far as you're
concerned
well i can't tell because i these are my
ideas well not all of them obviously but
their ideas i'm at least deeply familiar
with so i can't tell to what degree it's
original
none of it and so
i and it's it's also i suppose i'm quite
apprehensive about its release in some
sense because
i've set myself up an
impossible
second act
you know because the first book was so
insanely popular i think it's six
million copies now
in in all the languages it's been
published in
so
um
that's impossible that never happens
right it's it's certainly it's like
winning the lottery
it's probably less probable than winning
the lottery in fact i'm virtually
certain that it's less probable than
winning the lottery
and to to imagine doing that twice is
well that's just it happens but it's
highly improbable
anyways it's going to all come and then
you know i'm in a different space than i
was when i released this first book so
this is compared to all this is going to
be compared to all my electronic avatars
which are busily
working out there in the world i think
there's more of me outside of me now
than there is inside of me weirdly
enough
that's another phenomenon that i can't
really get my hand my my my uh mind
around
you know the power of youtube
jesus that's quite the
technology when i put those first videos
up you know i was this was bothering me
this piece of legislation and
for a variety of reasons some of which
we've discussed i talked to my wife and
my son sort of casually i said well i'm
gonna make these videos see what happens
and
just like
famous last words
yes
yeah man look it's resonated it will
continue to resonate you are you have an
extraordinary ability to translate what
people are feeling into the actions they
need to take to get out of it
it is not a mistake that you are a very
practiced clinical psychologist that is
able to scale what you were doing
one-on-one now to the many it's
extraordinary and i think it's really
had an impact on society my fantasy i
loved being a clinician
it was a great job
you know
i really loved it there was nothing
better than intense conversations about
how to make things better
when both partners in the conversation
are fully committed to that
it's such fun to
produce incremental improvement
sometimes more than incremental you know
collaboratively there's nothing better
than that i love doing my lecture tour
because it was that on a large scale it
was i talked to dave rubin about that
this week because of course he was long
on the tour
and it was such
it was so
perfect
to be talking to people about making
things better and to have everyone at
least in that moment fully on board with
the idea you couldn't you couldn't ask
for anything better than that
was great and to have the support i've
had from people it just stuns me
you know i think it's actually traumatic
to have that much support
that's interesting why traumatic
it's not easy to know what to do with
you know the cheers of a million people
it's overwhelming it's dangerous
dangerous because it can
seep into your identity or this is
probably not directly relevant but i
don't know
you know i've thought a lot about hitler
you know was it his arrogance or his
humility that led him to be the savior
so-called of germany
he had millions of people cheering for
him
how could you not think you were right
how could you possibly think you weren't
right
and so there's danger in that
you know i don't think i've
i don't think i've unfairly benefited
from it i'm not a hedonistic person
my life
style hasn't changed
but still it's it's just difficult to
see i also think
these are things i don't know what to
think about you know that i'm talking
about
if you're a movie star
people
are your fans you know for your roles
but i'm not playing a role
or if i am it's me
i'm no different on
in this conversation than i am
whenever i'm doing anything
you know i think well what is it well
i'm talking about all these great
clinical ideas it's the power of the
ideas it's the power of the
communications
technology brought together
and that's probably sufficient
explanation
but it's still strange and maybe i was
pretty old when this happened to me and
maybe that makes it more difficult to
adapt to
but you know my videos have been viewed
something like if you count them all
up approximately
with the ones that people have cut it's
like 600 million times it's
some
insane
number
it's incredible
it's incredible man it speaks to the
impact
so not that anybody would have a hard
time finding you but if people want to
track you in the book and the progress
and you getting more involved now again
uh where should they do it
well you can go to jordanb peterson.com
and everything's laid out there i have a
list of recommended books
that's quite fun there's about a hundred
books there if you read all those books
well you'd be educated not in everything
but
you know
you'd have an education
so there you go there's an education for
anyone who wants it they're 100 great
books that doesn't mean you know
everything about everything or even
something about everything but
what you do know would be useful and you
would know it and lots of people are
reading those books i can tell because i
run it through amazon
uh as a
third-party vendor
so i get some sense of how many book
affiliate yeah gets a sense of how many
books are being published a month and
are bought a month it's a lot so that's
fun
the
exercises that my partners and i have
developed self-authoring
and the personality
test understand myself are
are you can find them there and
self-authoring helps people write out an
identity
past present and future
and that seems to be really useful for
people because it's better to have a
plan you know what's the idea if you
don't have your own plan then you're the
tool of someone else's plan
so that's probably not
good especially if you don't know what
their plan is
so so that's useful you could do that
and and
um my own books are available there you
can find the youtube channel and the
podcast and we're my team is translating
a lot of the popular lectures into
multitude of languages
um
seven or eight languages we're going to
launch in the next
month
i just recorded the introductions to
those so
that's quite something
because increasingly it is a global
market youtube in particular is a global
market
so we're
experimenting with that
that's exciting awesome man well jordan
thank you so much for coming on the show
dude i i am
just
enthralled by what you're teaching and
offering to people and how will continue
to drink deeply of the content that you
put out like i said it's had a major
impact on my life so thank you for
everything guys if you're not already uh
wildly familiar with jordan peterson
trust me when i say go watch everything
it is absolutely breathtaking definitely
read the books they do read as a
yin-yang of each other so if you haven't
yet read
beyond order definitely get that if you
haven't read 12 rules for life get that
they are extraordinary and you will
really understand his philosophy once
you've read the tube all right speaking
of things that will help you understand
life if you haven't already be sure to
subscribe and until next time my friends
be legendary take care
[Music]
you